This is not a war that has been thought
[music] through at all. And my fear is
that the Iranian regime still has a
capacity to really cause a tremendous
amount of chaos in the Gulf. Bernard
Haykel, a Middle [music] East expert
who's following events in Iran and is in
regular contact with Saudi Arabia's
Crown Prince. Can I ask you which of
those scenarios you think is the most
likely?
>> My bet is that this regime will survive.
That this is a very tough regime that
still has [music] at least 20% of the
population on side and is willing to
kill to remain in power. And I think
what MBS will be doing now is telling
[music] Trump that we don't want chaos
in Iran.
From Bloomberg Weekend, this is the
[music] Michelle Hussein Show.
If, like me, you've been watching events
in the Middle East this week, there has
been so much to take in.
The strikes by Israel and the United
States are of a different order to what
we saw last year. In Iran, the
authorities say hundreds of people have
been killed. And Iran's retaliation has
seen targets struck in many countries:
Qatar, Bahrain, the United Arab
Emirates, Oman, Saudi Arabia. Which
makes this a wide conflict, a complex
picture, one that could have
consequences for even years to come.
And so obviously, we wanted to talk
about it to try at least to make sense
not only of what's happening now, but
where it's all heading. And that's when
I thought of Professor Bernard Haykel,
who has studied the Middle East for
decades. He's Professor of Near Eastern
Studies at Princeton University and
someone who looks at the politics of the
region with knowledge of its history,
its religions, culture, social change.
He has a deep understanding of Iran and
a particular insight into Saudi Arabia,
the biggest country in the region,
because he talks and WhatsApps regularly
with its powerful Crown Prince, Mohammed
bin Salman. Now, right at the end of
this, we get to Bernard Haykel's own
personal connection with the countries
he writes about, but I hope you get from
the conversation what I did, some
clarity at a turbulent time.
Tell me first of all, Professor Haykel,
what it was like when you heard the news
last Saturday that the US and Israel had
begun striking Iran. What were the first
thoughts that went through your mind? I
wasn't surprised that this attack
happened. I was only surprised by how
soon it did given that they were still
negotiating, the Iranians were
negotiating with the Americans. But, you
know, word among the leaders in the Gulf
states, people like the Crown Prince of
Saudi Arabia, was that Israel would
sooner or later attack because Iran is
at its weakest. They had knocked out
most of its, if not all of its, air
defenses last June,
and that this was an opportunity to
really destroy and defeat the system
itself and to topple the regime. The
surprise was more to do with timing, and
also the fact that the Americans were
all in on this, because it was primarily
an Israeli
decision to to attack, I think. Were you
surprised though by how fast it spread
to other countries? That because of the
Iranian retaliation, we soon had all
these other countries in the region
which found that they were being struck.
Yes. Only in as much as the Iranian
regime felt existentially threatened.
The Iranians have been saying this, by
the way, to all the leaders in the Arab
world that if they are existentially
threatened, that they will attack
broadly and widely and try to
disrupt oil shipments and gas shipments,
and they would do exactly what has
happened and what is still happening. I
also knew that within the regime in Iran
that there were sort of two factions. uh
One faction basically said that the
response to the killing of Qassem
Soleimani by President Trump in the
first term, this is the head of the Quds
Force of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard
Corps. And then later the 12-day war of
last year that the response of the
Iranians was very muted and that that
basically had encouraged the Israelis
and the Americans to feel that they were
undeterred and that they would attack
again. So, the other faction in Iran
that's more, say, forward-leaning or
more aggressive said, you know, this
time if they attack us, we're really
going to have to respond. Otherwise, we
have no deterrence whatsoever. Or maybe
also it's almost a question of
reputation and there's something perhaps
almost, you know, primeval that comes
out of like you just do want to show
that you've got it in you to fight back.
Yes, and also I think that within Iran
itself, the longer-range ballistic
missiles had been very seriously
destroyed by the Israelis in the 12-day
war of last June.
The Iranians now have a much larger
arsenal of short-range missiles and
drones that hadn't been damaged. So,
that's why you're seeing so many more
missiles going at the UAE and at Bahrain
and Kuwait and Qatar and Saudi Arabia
because that's the arsenal that the
Iranians actually still have relatively
speaking large numbers of. Before we
dive deeper into many facets of what
you've set out, Bernard, I want to ask
about how you see a moment like this
with your knowledge and expertise
because you've studied history, you've
studied Islam. So, when you see the
news, are you always using that longer
lens, that looking back in time, putting
it in that kind of context? I mean, yes,
these are modern states and their their
ideologies, including the the Iranian
state, you know, it's ideology draws on
a particular cherry-picked version of
Islam, but it's a modern state and it's
a modern ideology. And I see the Middle
East as
riven or divided between two groups or
two ideologies, two ways of looking at
the world. So, you have the status quo
powers. Those are powers that basically
want to develop their countries and they
want peace and stability to economically
advance and they include Saudi Arabia,
Egypt, Jordan, also the UAE despite what
they're doing in Sudan and and Yemen.
And then you have this other group that
is revisionist. I would call them
revisionist in the sense that they want
to redraw the map of the Middle East.
They want to change the power dynamics
in the Middle East and they include,
surprisingly, both Iran and the Israeli
right-wing. And the Iranians want to see
Israel destroyed. They want to see
America thrown out of the region
militarily as well as its economic and
political
and cultural influence. And the Israelis
also at the right-wing in Israel also
wants to reshape and reimagine the
Middle East according to its own
political agenda. And and so what we're
seeing today is um
one of the revisionist powers, that is
the Israelis, attempting to do just
that, to destroy uh the Iranian regime
and to see either something replace it
or chaos for that matter. And that's a
real fear of mine is that if you end up
with a failed state in Iran with 92
million people, you could end up with a
catastrophic situation for Iranians and
for the neighbors. It's interesting to
me that you do call Iran a modern state
because in so many ways its structure,
the theocracy, the fact that it has
well, had in the form of Ali Khamenei,
the supreme leader and Ayatollah at the
top of the pyramid. Should we not see it
as a theocracy? Should we see it as a
modern nation-state in which the
leadership are called names other than
what we're used to. So, it is a
theocracy in as much as you have a
cleric who, you you know, heads it. Uh
now, a dead cleric in in Khamenei, and
before him Khomeini. But, if you look at
the ideology of Iran, of the state, you
see it's a combination of different
different strands. So, you have
anti-imperialism, you have
anti-colonialism, these are modern
ideologies. You have social justice
ideas from communism and Marxism, those
are modern, as well. But, you also have
elements of pre-modern medieval
theology, as well, that are
repackaged in a modern guise. And then,
you also have Iranian nationalism, which
is again a modern ideology, not a
ancient one. So, what you have is sort
of a hybrid regime in Iran in its
ideology. And this is true, by the way,
of other Islamist ideologies, like the
Muslim Brotherhood, is a combination of
elements of
traditional Islam with modern
ideologies. Let's dig in then to the
peril of this moment and the complexity
of this moment, particularly in relation
to Iran. I think for most people, what
they're imagining is either the regime
survives or it doesn't survive. And if
it doesn't survive, then most people
hope something
better comes out of that. You're raising
the prospect that the state could fail
and there is just anarchy. Yes. So, I
think there are three possibilities from
what we're seeing today. So, the regime
survives as it is and gets hardened even
further in its determination to to be a
revisionist power and the theocracy that
Ayatollah Khomeini set up in 1979
with the Revolutionary Guard Corps in
control and a cleric as a supreme
leader. So, that's one possibility. The
other is Venezuela-like solution. So,
the regime stays, but you have a new
leadership that's much more nationalist,
less revolutionary, and that is willing
to cut deals with the Trump
administration. That's what I just
termed the Venezuela solution. So, same
regime but reformed. And the third
possibility is the falling of the regime
or the downfall of the regime. And in
that case, you could end up with a civil
war. You could end up with different
ethnicities. Iran is
only about 50% Persian by ethnicity. So,
you have other ethnicities, the Baluch,
the Kurds, uh the Azeris, the Arabs, and
they could be armed by outside powers
and they you you could end up with a
very chaotic and a very weakened central
state. And that would spell a disaster
for Iran and for and for the region
itself. Because Iran is a large country
with a super talented population and has
massive resources in oil and gas. And
seeing a Libya-style war in Iran would
be catastrophic.
>> Can I ask you which of those three
scenarios at this point in time you
think is the most likely? My bet is that
this regime will survive. That this is a
very tough uh regime that still has at
least 20% of the population on side and
is willing to kill to remain in power.
And we saw this in the response to the
demonstrations that took place in
January. The regime was willing to kill
tens of thousands of its own citizens.
So, this is not a a regime that's going
to easily disappear. It has deep roots
in Iranian society. And you know,
frankly, it has delivered despite all
its problems. It has delivered on basic
services for its population, whether
it's health care, education, and basic
infrastructure. Um so, I I don't see it
disappearing. Um I think the Americans
are hoping for a Venezuela-like reform
regime. And I the Israelis probably
would prefer a chaos in Iran. But if
that first scenario of yours, the
survival of the regime and the possible
strengthening is the most likely in your
view, we will be asking in time, what
was this war for? Yeah, I don't think
the Americans by the way have thought
through that is the Trump administration
have thought through the scenarios for
after this war at all.
I think they just went into this
thinking it would be a very quick and
easy decapitation of the leader and that
somehow the regime would immediately
come to a Venezuela like accommodation
with the Americans. But even President
Trump said that the success of that
initial attack that killed Ayatollah
Khamenei was so successful that you know
they knocked out several of the
potential leaders who they were hoping
to take over the regime and then make
this accommodation. So, this is not a
war that has been thought through at
all. And and my fear is that the Iranian
regime still has the capacity to really
cause a tremendous amount of chaos in
the Gulf and we see this now with the
Strait of Hormuz is blocked. No one will
insure a ship going through there and
that's about 20% of global oil and a lot
of the world's gas. And so we we're
going to see a lot of chaos if this war
doesn't end soon. Can I ask you Ben to
explain something else that we've been
seeing in a number of countries, India,
Pakistan, Yemen, Turkey, Iraq, Nigeria
and that is Shia Muslims protesting and
publicly mourning the Ayatollah. Now,
would you say that is religious or
political or a mixture? How should we
understand it?
So, the Ayatollah in Iran subscribes to
a particular version of 12er Shiite
Islam and the doctrine itself is called
Wilayat al-Faqih which means the
guardianship of the jurist. This is a
distinctive modern doctrine that
Ayatollah Khomeini came up with. And
most Shia in the world, most 12er
Shiites in the world and they represent
about 15% of the the population in the
world don't adhere to this doctrine.
They don't see it as as legitimate. But
they have tremendous affinity and
affection for the regime in Iran and for
the leadership of the regime if even
though theologically they're not
connected to it. So I I see most of the
the Shia lamentation and response to
what is happening in Iran and the
killing of Khamenei as more political
than theological. It is then directly
against the United States and Israel. It
is not just mourning for a for a
spiritual leader. Yeah, it is more of a
political sentiment and it's it's one by
the way that's shared by others. I mean
people who see Iran as a country that is
resisting empire, that's resisting
Israel, that's resisting colonialism
have tremendous sympathy for Iran.
People who identify with it on that
basis as well. So you'll have many
leftists for instance who will feel very
sad about what's happening in Iran and
and uh the death of its leader. Let's
talk then about Saudi Arabia and
particularly about the leadership of
Saudi Arabia, the Crown Prince Mohammed
bin Salman. You've got a forthcoming
book about Saudi Arabia today and you do
talk to the Crown Prince on a one-to-one
basis.
First of all, can you give us your sense
of these conflicting reports about what
Mohammed bin Salman wanted to happen
between the US and Iran, and Iran,
whether he was behind the scenes pushing
for these strikes on Iran?
Yes. So I've spoken to Mohammed bin
Salman specifically about this issue
over the last two or three years. And
he's been very clear and categorical
that he does not want a war with Iran.
He does not want Israel to attack Iran.
And that he has tried to reduce tensions
with Iran and you see this in a a
detente agreement that was signed in
March of 2023 with the help of the
Chinese that reopened embassies between
Saudi Arabia and Iran and resumed visas
and so on.
>> Which is a really striking moment given
their relationship over a long period of
time. That's right. I mean the regime in
Iran since the time of Ayatollah
Khomeini, so since 1979, has vilified
Saudi Arabia and the rulers in Saudi
Arabia and seeing them as illegitimate
puppets of the West and even Ayatollah
Khomeini used very abusive terms when
referring to the Saudi royal family
calling them the camel grazers of Najd,
Najd being the central province of Saudi
Arabia.
And so the history is one of great
tension and initially when King Salman,
the father of Muhammad bin Salman,
acceded to the throne in 2015, Muhammad
bin Salman, he's known as MBS in the
West, actually attacked Iran verbally
and compared Ayatollah Khomeini to
Hitler and said that, you know, we'll
take the fight to them if they fight us
and so on. And then he toned down his
rhetoric and then tried to reestablish
better relations with the Iranians,
those relations having broken off in
2017 when a prominent Shiite cleric in
Saudi Arabia was executed for um
resistance to the regime and for
promoting revolution to the regime,
according to the Saudis. Anyway, MBS
realizes that Iran has this arsenal of
short-range missiles that they can do a
tremendous amount of damage to not just
his oil facilities but also his vital
installations like desalination plants,
electricity generation plants,
communication systems, uh and so on. And
he has no effective way of blocking that
swarm of attack that the Iranians can
send against Saudi Arabia. And we saw
this in September 2019 when the
Iranians, in a display of their
firepower, attacked a major oil
separation facility in uh Saudi Arabia
called Abqaiq and damaged it very
severely and knocked out 50% of their
production. So he's very wary and and
worried about about uh what Iran can do
and so did not want the war. So the
Washington Post article saying that MBS
was supporting an attack on Iran is is
not true.
>> You're sure of that? They Absolutely.
>> Their their reporting was that four
people familiar with the matter said
that he made multiple private phone
calls to Trump over the past month
advocating a US attack. I mean, the
Saudis have pushed back against this
publicly. You're sure that version's
true? Yeah, he did call Trump several
times asking him not to attack. Not so
that's the true version of it and he
having said that
he also warned the Iranians because the
Iranians did threaten him that if they
are existentially threatened that they
would attack him and he warned the
Iranians that if they were to attack
him, he would have to defend himself and
that he would launch attacks against
Iran and I think that's exactly what's
likely to happen. You're going to see
the Saudi Air Force getting involved in
this war on the side of both the US and
Israel. He is a nationalist. MBS is a
nationalist and he has to show his own
population that he can defend the
country against these attacks because
the attacks have been on civilian
targets and and industrial targets. The
major oil refinery has been attacked and
so on and so he needs to as like the
Iranians reestablish deterrence
vis-a-vis Iran. That would be another
widening of this war. Yes. Yeah, and I
think we're going to see that if the
Iranians don't stop soon and if this war
doesn't stop soon, you will see a
widening of it and you'll see Gulf
states involved in defending themselves.
And so this is this was his fear. His
fear is that you know, he can't defend
his his vital installations and you
know, you have to imagine if you're MBS
for instance and you have a city like
Riyadh with 7-8 million people that
relies very heavily on desalination that
is the boiling of seawater to produce
fresh water and if those plants are
damaged, you have no water.
And you would have to evacuate your
cities.
That's an existential crisis for Saudi
Arabia.
Uh and that is why he was against this
war. Would Saudi Arabia not have seen a
prize in a potentially weakened Iran?
I'm imagining the conversations between
him and the Trump administration or or
President Trump himself. Would it not
benefit from a weakened Iran? I know you
think that it's not we're not going to
end up with a with a weakened Iran, but
would he have been tempted by that
possibility?
Well, he has no love for the Iranian
regime. Uh there's a long history of
animosity. But he his main concern is
not a weakened Iran, but an Iran that
has no state or a failed state and that
it ends up in chaos and civil war. See,
this is where the perspective of a
country like Saudi Arabia is radically
different from that of Israel.
And I think this is where the United
States shares more with Saudi than it
does with Israel.
Because the Saudis see the Iranians as
neighbors.
They're not going to go away. And chaos
in Iran would spill over into Saudi
Arabia. Whereas Israel is a thousand
kilometers away from from Iran and
doesn't care what happens there.
Uh so you have very a very different
perspective, a much more prudent view on
the future
uh out of necessity. I mean, this is not
love for Iran. This is just pure
pragmatism and realpolitik. And I think
what MBS will be doing now is telling
Trump that we don't want chaos in Iran.
Yeah, but he didn't manage to deter
President Trump from being part of this
and being right at the forefront of it.
And yet Correct. from what President
Trump has said, he seems to admire
Mohammed bin Salman a lot. He likes him
a lot. He said that publicly. Yes, I
mean, it is very true that uh Prime
Minister Netanyahu of Israel has
prevailed in convincing President Trump
that this war should be waged by the
United States and that MBS has not been
able to convince Trump otherwise.
President Trump came to political
awareness in the 1970s when you had the
two major oil crises of 1973 and 1979.
He sees the Arab sheikhs as the richest
and most powerful people who uh need to
be cultivated uh because that's what he
saw in the 1970s with characters like
Adnan Khashoggi and Sheikh Ahmed Zaki
Yamani and all these super wealthy One
of the arms dealer, one
the oil minister of Saudi Arabia for a
time. Correct. And and he saw the
massive transfer of wealth from uh
consuming oil-consuming countries to
oil-producing countries, and Saudi
Arabia became, you know, the one of the
richest countries on the planet almost
overnight. That's very appealing to
President Trump. And I think he sees the
Arabs as uh the Arab sheikhs in
particular as sources of revenue for the
United States. He doesn't see them as
serious strategic allies or thinkers or
influencers when it comes to US policy,
but rather as um sort of cash cows, if
you like, uh for uh the American
industry and for and and for the
American economy.
>> And the other way, what does Mohammed
bin Salman think of Donald Trump?
My suspicion is that he uh
um
Look, uh let me put it to you very
bluntly. A Saudi, this is not MBS, a
very kind of well-connected Saudi told
me that, you know, you Americans can
elect a monkey to the White House and we
would have to like him. So, the view of
any Saudi leader uh when it comes to the
United States is that you have to have a
good relationship with the president.
That's why they've almost always
insisted that the ambassador, the US
ambassador in Riyadh, should be a
personal friend of the president who can
just pick up the phone and call him. Um
they have to get along with the US
because they depend for their security
on the US. Their investments are in the
US, and their culture is oriented
towards the United States. So, you know,
he has to deal with with President
Trump, and I think that my sense when
I've asked MBS uh about the comparison
between the Biden administration in the
last year of the Biden administration
when relations got very warm with the
Saudis and and President Trump is that
MBS had great appreciation for the
institution to institutional relations
that had developed between the US and
Saudi Arabia. President Biden in his
last year was negotiating seven or eight
agreements with the Saudis.
There'd been some very strong
institutional links that had developed
in that period and that was something
that I think MBS appreciated greatly.
Now with President Trump, it's much more
personal, much more transactional and
much less predictable. And I don't think
that aspect of the relationship, however
much MBS might like President Trump, the
transactional quality and the fact that
he can turn on someone very quickly as
we saw with Prime Minister Modi for
instance recently over Russian oil sales
is not something that
any Saudi leader would appreciate. From
your knowledge of MBS, will he also be
resenting what this is likely to mean
for his domestic agenda? He's in the
midst of this big Vision 2030
transformation of his economy. He's got
a large population. He needs to
make sure that it's a properly
functioning economy, not just a an oil
one. We can already see the impact on
the region and potentially on the global
economy from what's happening now. So
does it does it actually threaten his
whole agenda at home? Yes. I mean any
chaos in the region, any instability,
any you know, the flying of of missiles
and drones is very bad for the Vision
2030. This is economic diversification
and the social transformation of Saudi
Arabia that MBS has put into place. So
he doesn't want wars anywhere. That's
why he's been very keen to end the war
in Sudan. He's very keen to also see
stability in Yemen.
He wants an end to the war in Gaza. You
know, for him
any chaos in the region blocks the
vision that he has, which is that of an
integrated economic zone in the Middle
East that's comparable to the EU and in
which Saudi Arabia is the hub. And Saudi
Arabia connects Asia to Africa and to
Europe and you have a logistics and and
tourism industry and tech industry that
is thriving in Saudi Arabia. And so all
of that is now in jeopardy. That's why
he wants this war with Iran to end very
quickly. He also, of course, wants a
high oil price to be able to pay for all
these projects of his. And
you know, there's a temporary rise in
oil prices, but it's it's not something
that's sustainable. So no, he doesn't
want to see this. He doesn't want to see
chaos. Can we talk about other
relationships within the region,
Bernard? And I'm thinking particularly
about Saudi Arabia and the UAE, which
Yes. have had a very difficult period in
the last few months linked well, you
explain, but to Yemen and maybe an also
broader rivalry between these two
countries? Yeah, I think that there is a
a rivalry and a and a competition
between Saudi Arabia and the UAE that is
both structural and personal. So at the
structural level, there's a difference
in size. Saudi Arabia is larger than
Western Europe. So you know, Saudi
Arabia is the 600-pound gorilla and
wants the UAE and other countries in the
region, the Qatar's, the Bahrain's, the
Kuwait's to defer to its leadership and
to its size. There's also a difference
in oil policy between Saudi Arabia and
and the UAE. The UAE wants to produce a
lot more oil. Saudi Arabia wants to
contain the production of oil to
maintain a a floor on the price. There's
of course competition over companies
where their headquarters are going to be
based. Saudi is the biggest economy in
the region. There's competition over
tech and all kinds of other things. And
then there's also competition over the
vision of the of the region. I mean the
UAE is a bit like Great Britain. It's
trying to spread its influence through a
network, a kind of a maritime empire,
through a network of connections with
different actors, some of them non-state
actors, in Yemen, in the Horn of Africa,
in Somalia, and Somaliland, and Sudan.
And this is something that the Saudis
don't appreciate because they feel that
this uh political ambition of the UAE is
encircling them and is causing chaos,
especially as the UAE backs non-state
actors and separate separatist movements
in the in these different countries. And
then there's a personal difference
between the two leaders as well. Between
Mohammed bin Salman and Mohammed bin
Zayed? Correct. Yes, who's the president
of the UAE and the Sheikh of of Abu
Dhabi. How are they different
personally?
So, the leader of the UAE thinks that
he's the equal of MBS and that's that
causes tension. Uh he also has a
different view on on policy. He's
extremely aggressive, that is MBZ is
extremely aggressive when it comes to
Islamists. He wants to crush them
everywhere. He sees them as a threat.
Whereas MBS, uh you know, dislikes
Islamists but is willing to work with
some of them in Syria and Sudan and
Yemen because he sees the alternative to
be worse. So, he's more pragmatic and
when it comes to Islamism. And I think
there are differences in in temperament
and personality. And given that you you
do have these conversations with MBS,
what surprised you the most as you
started to get to know him that way?
So, he he's a fairly young person. He's
30 years old and he's very very
charismatic. Uh really tries to get
people to like him immediately and has a
phenomenal sort of knowledge of
everything and inundates you with
information and data when you speak to
him. He's a a of techno-futurist. He's a
bit like Elon Musk in that way. And then
some of that stuff, you know, strikes me
as not realistic, but his knowledge of
the domestic politics and the regional
politics is quite impressive. And I
think also the way he is able to handle
Americans is is very impressive. I'll
give you an anecdote about this. So, uh
there was an American delegation of
Republicans and and Democrats who wanted
to visit him, and they did. The
Democrats insisted before going into the
room that they never they did not want
to take photographs with him. They don't
want to take selfies with him.
Republicans were happy to take selfies
with him. By the time the meeting ended,
everyone, Democrat and Republican, were
taking photographs and wanted to take
photographs with him. So, he's he he can
really kind of captivate people and turn
them
uh uh around in terms of liking him. I
imagine that this is quite recent, this
this incident. I mean, it'll be after
the murder of Jamal Khashoggi,
which is probably why they the Democrats
didn't want their picture taken with him
at first. I mean, he obviously has um a
problem with dissent, doesn't he? That's
a country with political prisoners. Yes,
yes, he's an authoritarian. And by the
way, he doesn't conceal the fact that
he's an authoritarian. And like all
authoritarians, he will say, you know, I
had to be very harsh with dissent
because I needed order and stability
given the massive transformation uh that
I'm undertaking in the country,
especially when it comes to questions of
religion and women's rights. And so, he
justifies the repression through
questions of order and and
transformation. That said, Americans and
others have put pressure on him
privately to release uh some of these uh
dissidents and political and prisoners
of conscience, and he has released about
a thousand of the 3,000 that are in
prison uh and over the last year and a
half. And I think it's uh he has done
this also for pragmatic reasons because
he's very uh conscious of the brand, the
country's brand, and he does he wants
the country to have a good reputation,
not least to be able to attract tourists
and to attract foreign direct
investment. And so he knows that the
human rights record, which is
a bad one when it comes to Saudi Arabia.
Incidentally, it's also bad for the UAE
and and almost all Arab countries,
unfortunately, if not all of them,
except for Lebanon. You know, it's bad
for business. So he wants to improve
that aspect of his country's reputation.
And of course you mentioning Lebanon
makes me conscious of your heritage. You
were born in Lebanon, you grew up in
Lebanon, and well, I mean, it's had so
many difficult times over the years, but
you know all of this really well. I
wonder as you look ahead, do you think
do do you feel a sense of apprehension
for what comes next in the region, or is
there a sense of opportunity somewhere
in all of this?
Look, basically, you have in the Middle
East a group of nations that are all,
with the exception of Iran, allies of
the United States. And the US has to
play a central role in pressurizing and
and making sure that these different
countries get along with each other
despite their many differences. So you
have Turkey, you have Israel, you have
Saudi Arabia, you have Egypt. What
happens with Iran is crucial for the
future, but let's say you have a
reformed regime in Iran that is less
revolutionary. There's an opportunity
certainly for the US
to bang heads together and make the
countries of this region work closer
together and better together. But for
that, you would need, for instance, the
US to put pressure on Israel to come up
with
a solution to the Palestinian question
of statehood.
Uh you would need to also make sure
that, you know, tensions say between
Saudi Arabia and the UAE don't
get worse. You need to contain Turkey's
expansion through the use of Islamism.
Uh so the US has to play this key role
as a mediator between these countries.
And And it doesn't do that, I think that
you will have perpetual tension. Uh
maybe not war as much as what we're
seeing now, but but a lot of instability
and sources of
of of radicalization. The most important
of which is the question of Palestine.
And as things stand, not only is
statehood very far away, but aid is not
being allowed into Gaza. That was Yeah.
one of the impacts of this war breaking
out.
Yes, and I think you know, from the
Saudi perspective, let's say, there's
going to be an election in Israel later
this year, and the hope is that you end
up with a less right-wing government
that sees, now that say Iran has been
put into a box and is less radical and
and less uh of a menace, that there's a
possibility of a more tolerant uh view
on the question of Palestine, and that
the Israelis can finally come to some
sort of accommodation with the
Palestinians by realizing that if this
problem is not solved, you'll always
have repeated wars and repeated tensions
and violence. And other countries, now
maybe not Iran, but perhaps Turkey in
the future, using the Palestinians to uh
foment trouble for for Israel. And do
you today feel more American than
Lebanese? I wonder what your connection
is at a personal level to the region
today when Lebanon's the place that you
were born and brought up? I do feel very
American and and uh I feel like I am an
American patriot because this country
has been wonderful to me and to my
family. And I I feel very sad and and
ashamed of Lebanon for the governments
that we've had and the fact that you
have this remarkable community of
Lebanese that is talented, uh we have
the best human capital in the region, we
have lots of money in the diaspora.
Uh you know, the Lebanese could easily
turn this their country, which is one of
the most beautiful in the world, into a
paradise and have not done so. And
that's a source of of sadness and and
frankly of shame. They have had a lot of
outside meddling in the country. That's
right, but they've been willing to allow
outsiders to meddle as well. There was a
photograph I saw on X, you've probably
seen the same, which is of a Middle East
Airlines plane taking off from Beirut
Airport just as air strikes are coming
in, which kind of
says something about resilience and what
you learn when when you've been through
cycles of conflict, life has to go on.
Yes, I mean the Lebanese are the most
resilient people. And frankly, there are
also there are also other images where
you see, you know, say people in one
half of Beirut where there is no war
playing tennis and in swimming pools in
the other half of the city being bombed
at the smithereens during the civil war.
We've had scenes like that as well. And
those again are not anything to be proud
of. Professor Bernard Haykel, thank you
so much for talking to us and for
sharing so much knowledge.
Thank you.
>> [music]